so
welcome everybody it's good to see a
nice collection of people
online for this one and this is a talk
called
once around the cepheids and the picture
on the left is
very representative of what a couple of
cepheid variables might look like
uh very much the orange or yellow giant
stars
uh that we find in the skies and quite a
rarity in some ways
so the first uh discovery was
1784 when uh edward pigotts noted
the variability of a star in the
constellation of aquila the eagle
uh the eater star that's this one here
and that it was changing its brightness
by
nearly a whole magnitude and that was
really the first discovery of um
variable stars there's a couple of
people joining now let's let them in
so the first discovery 1784
of this variable star that changed its
brightness
but didn't take long before several
dozen variable stars had been identified
and a particular class of them were
seen to all vary in a very similar way
and
were named the cepheids the cepheid
variables
named after the brightest of them which
was delta sephi
the fourth brightest star in the
constellation of cepheus the king
and a good one to choose because it was
one of the most
bright examples
and then really the fact that there was
this grouping of them
was picked up first by john goodrich
he identified that the the of all the
variable
stars in the sky the cepheids were this
particular
class that shared a load of properties
and this is the delta sapphire here
up near the pole his polaris the pole
star delta sapphire down here
um was the brightest of them and this is
it again you can see that yellowy color
to it
so um quite a bright star
and a yellow star
but particularly noted to be varying
in a very curious manner if you plot
out the light curve of delta sephi
over time so we've got time running this
way
and brightness going up here you can see
this is half a magnitude
so it's changing by about one whole
magnitude
so that's a factor of two and a half in
brightness
because of the somewhat crazy way the
magnitude scale works
you can see it has this characteristic
slopes down
and then sharply turns back up in
brightness again
and then the ascent is very steep
compared to the descent phase and then
again another sharp turn
and it repeats it goes down slowly and
up quickly
so rather a curious
way for a star to behave
have a couple of people joining just get
letting those in
so we've got 24 now
on stream live and so
this uh very curious behavior of these
cepheid variables
with this characteristic like curve
uh
shown at the bottom here shows how the
the brightness
is varying in this sort of sharks fin
sawtooth curve you can see that in an
image at the top here
there's a cepheid variable right in the
middle fading and then quickly
brightening again so you can see the
fade time you can see the dates april
28th
may the 4th and so on but it's fading
slowly and then it brightens very
sharply again
and this pulsation is associated we
think
with the star changing its size uh the
size of this
the photosphere the area from which the
light comes
as we look at the star the larger the
area
the more light we are going to receive
in direct proportion to the area
even if the temperature stays the same
now the next step in really
understanding these cepheid variables
came with a study actually based
on looking at the large and small
magellanic clouds it's a nice image of
the two they are dwarf galaxies
that are the companions of the milky way
galaxy in which we live
we don't get to see them from the
northern hemisphere they're only visible
in the
south and
the large magellanic cloud this one
that's about 160
170 000 light years away
and the small magellanic cloud about 220
000 light years away
but cepheid variables are quite bright
and
this lady henrietta swan levitt one of
the heroes of astronomy
tracked down cepheid variables in the
large
magellanic cloud
and was able to
produce a graph of the light curve of
the individual
cepheid variables many of them in the
lmc
here and the trick to that of course
is that the large magellanic cloud
is a long way away and
all the stars in it are essentially at
the same distance from us
because they're all clustered together
all 168 000 light years away
and the size of the large magellanic
cloud is maybe
a few tens of light years at most so
essentially the distance to
all of these cepheids that she was able
to measure within it
is the same to a fairly close
margin and that's very useful because
we can then say well the inverse square
law
of brightness versus distance can be
ignored
because their distance is a constant
and so any change in the brightness
compared comparing one star against
another
must be due to its inherent power output
not because it's at a different distance
because they're all members
of the large magellanic cloud and what
she found
was that she could
get a very nice graph out of this
which she could plot a straight line
through which is always a good thing
in any science and what she discovered
was that
if she looked at the brightness of the
stars on average their average
brightness during the
period or their peak brightness it makes
no difference
so the brightness is on this axis and
this is a
true measure of their luminosity
remember because they're all at the same
distance
all 168 000 light years from us
if she drew the a graph of their
brightness against the period of their
oscillation then she found that they
came out with a very nice straight line
now this is uh an amazing result why
why would you think that the period that
they oscillated over would be related to
their
power output perhaps perhaps that's
obvious
it's not obvious to me but
she spotted this and
it turns out that because of that you
can then
look at a cepheid variable somewhere
else
and if you know its brightness
and you as it appears
you can work out from this graph
based on the period that you see what
its
actual luminosity is supposed to be
i'll explain that again so if we measure
the period
and say it was oscillating on a 10-day
period
then it must be at this point on the
graph
and therefore have a luminosity of
12.8 on this scale
and we can compare that with the
actual brightness observed say for a
cepheid variable
somewhere in the milky way where we
don't know the distance
but because we have the power output and
the
uh apparent brightness we can compare
the two and by that standard candle law
the inverse square law of brightness
versus distance
we can use it to get the distance of any
other cepheid variable
wherever we can track one down and this
was a huge
step forward for astronomy in terms of
being able to measure the distance to
different objects so if we could see a
cepheid variable now
in the small magellanic cloud we'd only
need to see
one and we'd be able to work out the
distance
and indeed the same was true for other
galaxies
much further away up to that point the
only way we had of measuring the
distance to
the stars was by the parallax method
which is to take two different
viewpoints
and see how the nearby object appears to
shift its position
against the much more distant background
objects
you can do it with your two eyes if you
hold your thumb out
in front of you against the screen with
one eye open
and obscure the star and then swap the
swap eyes you'll see that the object
uh jumps or that your thumb jumps
relative to the background
and that's as illustrated here and from
that a little bit of trigonometry you
can work out the
uh how far away it is to the stars
so that was the only way that we had of
doing that
and we would use the longest baseline we
could
arrange which was the two ends of the
earth's orbit
so we would have a baseline not the
distance between your eyes
but around 300 million kilometers
and that would allow us to measure the
distance
out to really only the nearest stars to
begin with
the the those that were within about 10
or 20 light
years beyond that we just didn't have
enough
of a change to be detectable with uh
ground-based instruments we've gone
further using parallax by
using satellites the hipparcos mission
was measuring those
angles involved down to 50 milli arc
seconds which is a truly tiny amount
um it's like seeing uh the width of a
human hair across the atlantic
for phenomenal accuracy and that took us
out to a few hundred light years
measuring the parallax
the idea was first suggested by another
famous
name in astronomy einar hertz sprung of
the hertz sprung russell diagram fame
and he attempted to
take this parallax method and use it to
measure the actual distance to some
cepheid variables
combining the result that henrietta swan
levitt had found
of the standard candle
inference from the period of a cepheid
variable
but if he actually knew the distance to
one then he could join
up the the distance scales between
what we knew of parallax for the ones
we've been able to measure
and the uh next step which is to then
infer
the distances of all observable cepheids
in the sky
anywhere using that uh that rule
now he failed uh the cepheids that he
was
able to find were too far away for his
parallax
measurements in 1913 but it was
done later and we managed to use the
parallax to measure
some that were
within our range to get a decent answer
uh and that were indeed cepheid
variables
and that allowed us to calibrate the
true distance
to things like the uh large magellanic
cloud
and then this man came along and with
this very famous photograph
of the andromeda nebula as he called it
at that point
the andromeda galaxy we would call it
now
it's in the negative so this is the
bright nucleus of the galaxy and the
spiral arms
but out here he's labeled
with a couple of marks a star
and you can see done a couple of others
here and written n by them
n was for nova because they'd become
brighter
but he's crossed out n and written var
by it with an exclamation mark
because what he'd spotted was a
cepheid variable star pulsating away
in the andromeda galaxy and
we didn't know whether the andromeda
nebula as he called it
was literally that a nebula within
the milky way or
a separate island universe a separate
galaxy in its own right
much further away and outside of the
milky way
but by using the period of
variability of this cepheid variable
in andromeda and the distance
ladder that had been established
and henrietta swan levitt's rule for
brightness versus
period and put all of that together and
showed that
this particular object was a million
light years away
and we knew at the time that no object
within the milky way had been found to
be more than about 50 000
light years from us so this was clearly
a separate galaxy a separate uh object
in its own right
and that really sealed a great debate
about whether the milky way was the
whole of the universe with everything in
it
uh or whether there were these separate
galaxies out there beyond
but he went a bit further and took uh
some results from uh
vesto schleifer who had been measuring
the
speed of movement of galaxies in terms
of their redshift their doppler shift
and used his cepheid variable idea to
discover
more cepheids in further galaxies
further away than andromeda and produce
a plot another straight line of
the distance this way
versus the speed of recession the
redshift
in the doppler shift of the spectrum of
the galaxies that schleifer had measured
he plotted the two against each other
and got a relatively good straight line
out of it
showing that the further away a galaxy
was
the faster it was receding from us
and that was the real clincher proof
of the expansion of the universe the
only real way that you can explain
this idea that all galaxies are moving
away
and that they're all moving away more if
they are already further away
is to have the whole universe be
expanding
now he wasn't the first to suggest the
idea that came a couple of years earlier
by this
chap george lemaitre who was a catholic
priest
and professor of physics perhaps an
unusual combination these days
but uh back then not so rare really
and he was a confidante and
correspondent of einstein's and had
solved einstein's field equations of
general relativity
and showed that they suggested that an
expanding universe was very likely
and he did it two years before hubble
had produced the evidence to back it up
and so when that came along
the whole idea really became mainstream
and lemaitre's idea was that if the
universe was expanding it must have been
smaller in the past
and it all pointed back to an origin of
what he called the primeval
atom nowadays we call that the big bang
the idea that everything emerged from a
compact state
and so you can use this law now to
use the redshift to find the the
distance of
even more distant galaxies even if you
can't find a cepheid in them so we now
have
three rungs on our cosmic distance
ladder
we use parallax first in our local
neighborhood
out to a few hundred light years and
calibrate
the distance of a number of known
cepheid variables
that within that and then we use the
cepheid
period versus brightness standard candle
law
to calibrate the distance to a number of
galaxies
and then use the that's then gives us a
an indication of how the redshift varies
with distance
and then beyond that we can use redshift
to measure the distance of
all of the others that are further away
and on the right we see hubble's law the
again the
speed distance relationship the redshift
versus distance
and the fact that uh you can draw a
straight line through it
means that you can get have h naught
hubble's constant
being the factor that uh relates
distance to recession speed
now the expansion of the universe isn't
a speed
um we talk about the the speed of the
galaxies are moving away from us and the
fact that they are moving
faster the further away they are but
really
this is an exponential expansion and the
and a better way of saying it is that
there is seven percent compound interest
applied to the size of the universe
um per billion years so it's a very very
low
interest rate um the bank would probably
charge you that
for a year if you were borrowing uh
unsecured loan but we're here we've
borrowed the universe and we only have
to see seven percent inflation on it
in a billion years so it's really quite
small
but there was a problem and the problem
was that
when you started to measure that hubble
constant
for different groups of cepheid
variables we started to find
that different people were coming
out with different answers to it
some were coming out with a number
that's in
the units they usually use was around 60
and some were coming out with a number
around 80. and we would often
lump it all together and call it 70 in
the middle
but that really wasn't right and if you
did use
70 then you would find that the age of
the universe would work out to be
around 10 billion years
and that was a bit of a problem because
some of the stars that we saw
in nearby globular clusters appeared to
be 12 billion years old
and they couldn't really be older than
the universe so it didn't make sense
and so during the the 70s and 80s and
into the 1990s this was a bit of a
problem um until they realized
with high resolution measurements that
what was happening
was that we were getting different
groups
within the cepheud variables two types
the classical cepheids are younger and
more massive
stars and the type
two cepheids are older stars
and they are from what we call
population two as opposed to population
one
so the classic cepheids are population
one what does that mean
it means that they are formed recently
out of the materials the star-forming
materials
that are present in the universe at the
moment which are
quite heavily contaminated because
they have a lot of what we what
astronomers call metals the
elements heavier than um than helium so
carbon iron things like that that
are the result of several generations of
stars
living forming the heavy elements
exploding
scattering them and then being reformed
into new
stars so population 1 are the most
youthful and therefore formed out of the
dirtiest material
whereas the type two cepheids are
population two they're the
middle age stars in terms of the
universe and
they're fainter and have been around for
a long time and were formed when the
universe was a bit cleaner
and these two followed different
uh light curve parameters and it was uh
astronomer bay that discovered this and
really resolved
the reason why we were getting two
different values
for the uh value of the hubble constant
and it was because when we were looking
a long way away we were looking a long
way back in time inevitably
and so we were picking up mostly the
one class of the the stars the
stars were had been formed early on in
the universe
and were there for population two uh
sort of metal-free stars whereas the
nearby
uh galaxies we're looking at the much
more
youthful stars that have been formed in
a much dirtier environment
and so you can see them colored in there
the two different classes the
population one and population two in the
turquoise and yellow colors hope that
comes through
and scattered around across the bottom
are a number of
confounding objects that were other
types of
variable star that had been
misclassified as cepheids
just to make things more complicated
so once bader sorted this out it meant
that we could
recalibrate things properly and
know which class of cepheid we were
looking at
and it resulted in the
doubling of our estimate of the distance
out to andromeda
out to well the modern figure is now
about two and a half
million light years
and so we've got this uh now this
relationship
that turns out not to be quite a
straight line either once we've really
got to grips with it all
the uh period brightness relationship is
for the two types of cepheids these two
curves
it's just that if you are only looking
at this group
here then it looks fairly like a
straight line it's only when you get to
the very short periods
and the very faint objects where the
curve starts to kick in so
if we have a look at these classical
cepheids then these
uh younger stars
turns out that they are yellow bright
giant or
super giant stars quite big with masses
4 to 20 solar masses
and the spectral type so
the color really varies from an orange k
type star up to a yellow white f-type
star
and of course the brightness is varying
and the temperature is varying so
they're oscillating
around and you can't really pin them
down to one particular spectral
class they're also very bright being
massive stars
the 20 solar mass monsters are up to a
hundred thousand times as bright as the
sun
and the period of oscillation is that of
a few weeks
and as i said these are young stars and
as with all massive stars massive stars
live fast and die
young there are no old massive stars
because their lifetime is too short they
burn through their fuel very quickly
and so this these stars are on the giant
branch of the hertzberg russell diagram
they've gone through the main sequence
burning their hydrogen to helium
and they're now burning in their cores
to form heavier elements
the type 2 cepheids turn out to be
much fainter because they are low-mass
stars they are
stars around half the mass of our sun
and these are
k type stars they orange color
and they last a very very long time they
have a very long lifetime being
so small they burn their fuel very very
efficiently
um and they tend to
have therefore been formed a very long
time ago
in the metal poor population two
time of the early universe and they they
have lifetimes of
hundreds of billions of years so they're
quite happy to outlive the the current
age of the
uh universe several times over into the
future
and these have periods of 1 to 50 days
and you can carve them up into several
different groups and it gets more
complicated
so there are diff one to four days 10 to
20 days and longer ones
but uh
if we had uh a look in our own galaxy
we'd find
a whole group of cepheid variables right
in the center there
and that's enabled us to recalibrate the
size of our galaxy as well
and we now know that the sun would be
about here on this diagram
is indeed about 27 000 light years from
the center
one of the brightest that we've
discovered of these cepheid variables
is this one rs pupis and this is a
lovely photograph of it
you can see the very bright yellow
colored star in the middle here and
there is this nebula that it's embedded
in
which seems to have a number of rings of
uh bright uh coloration around it
those rings are light echoes
where the periodic brightening of the
star sends the light straight towards us
but it also sends it in every other
direction and in particular of course it
sends it
sideways in the plane of the photograph
and then it collides with
the gas and lights the gas up
brighter it's like a camera flash going
off in the center periodically
but because the light has to travel
sideways and then towards us we see the
direct camera flash
from the direct line of sight and then
we see it bounce off
different rings of material at different
times
because of the extended light travel
time of going sideways first and then
being reflected towards us
and these these nebulae are sufficiently
big that
they're several light years across that
it makes quite a big difference to
travel time
so we get these light echoes so what is
going on with these stars what is what
is the mechanism
hiding behind all of this that's causing
this
pulsation that turns out to be so useful
to us
i'll try and explain it's called the
eddington cycle
and essentially it's like
having a pressure cooker with a loosely
fitting lid
you can start anywhere on this diagram
let's start
here where we've got the star at its
brightest at its largest size putting
out as the maximum amount of light
because it's now putting out so much
power it loses
uh energy faster than the core is
feeding energy to it
and so the surface then begins to cool
and it uh
shrinks down and shrinks back again
to a smaller denser state
and as it does so
the outer layers change in their
transparency
so as it cools
you get an increase in the
transparency and
rapid heat loss but then as it shrinks
back down again
the increased density makes it more
opaque
and what that does is bottles up the
heat
so this is the lid of your pressure
cooker slamming
shut and then the heat builds up inside
the pressure cooker
until it forces the lid off again and
the
the then the heat can escape and so it
uh oscillates between these two states
so there is the uh
system that's responsible for this is
the
partial and full ionization of helium
you have the energy generating core in
the center where
helium is being burned to form carbon
and overlying that
we have a layer of helium
at a temperature of 35 000 to 50
000 degrees which is a fully ionized
plasma
in other words both the electrons have
been ripped away
from the helium atom by that energy of
that temperature
and plasmas fully ionized they consist
of the
helium plus plus nucleus and a cloud of
electrons flying around at high
temperature
they're entirely composed of charged
particles
and they are opaque to electromagnetic
radiation
and so it acts as a light block
for any electromagnetic waves trying to
carry energy out from the core and so it
heats it up
it's effectively the lid is shut
now further out in the star towards the
surface where it's cooler
we have a lower temperature under 30
000 and that is
such uh that one of the electrons gets
recaptured
so you have a helium nucleus with one
electron
uh captured so it's just helium plus
as an ion um and that's
a partially ionized gas now and it's
partially transparent and so
the orange outer layer can let light
escape
but the inner yellow layer on the
diagram
is fully opaque to the light trying to
carry heat from the core
and so what happens in that state is
that the
heat is trapped and
the pressure increases and forces the
star to expand outwards
and of course as the gas and the plasma
expands
that then leads to a cooling of the
helium plus plus layer in its outer
layers
and the star re
uh the helium ions recapture an electron
and it converts it to helium plus in
that layer
um and suddenly the
layer becomes transparent leading to
all of that pent-up energy being able to
escape the star
and so that transition from he to plus
to he plus opens the heat valve
and lets the flash of light come out and
then the star starts uh
cooling again and shrinking back
and so it does this repeatedly over and
over again
and so just to summarize it goes back to
the beginning again
and now the heat is
going to result in well the increased
pressure and the heat is going to result
in the helium plus
re-ionizing and becoming opaque and
starting the whole process all over
again
now you can do some math so i've got
time for that we'll skip over it but
what it what it results in is a constant
that depends on the mass of the star
as to how fast that
energy is being generated in the core
and the amount of energy being generated
in the core
and the rate of power output drives that
valve
faster or slower which is why you get
that simple relationship
between the uh
period and the mass of the star and
therefore the overall brightness and
period relationship
now this is the hertzsprung russell
diagram
and we see the temperature
or color of the stars so hot row type
stars
cool red dwarfs and brown dwarfs down
this end
and the brightness going up on the
y-axis
and this line across the middle this is
the normal stars
of the main sequence like our sun which
is around about
here on the diagram and then we have the
layers on top of that of the
sub giants the giants the bright giants
the super giants and the hyper giant
stars in in further lines across the
diagram
so where do we find the cepheid
variables well they're along this
strip here and in fact the the two
strips
side by side represent the classic
cepheids the larger brighter ones
and the type ii cepheids here
if we look at that zoom in on that
so-called instability strip where the
cepheids live
we can explain what happens using
a classic cepheid and
we're going to choose a 5 solar mass
star
so it forms up here the sun would be
down here
and it lives out its main sequence life
converting hydrogen to helium
at this point uh with a temperature of
about 20
000 degrees and uh quite bright
until it runs out of its uh hydrogen in
its core
um and a reorganization that turns it
into a red giant has to happen
it uh cools the outer surface expands
and cools and it moves to the right on
the diagram
as they directly related to that drop in
the outer surface temperature
it whizzes across the instability strip
here
and then settles down for a life as a
red giant at this position
where it's very bright because it's very
large
but it's at a sort of 4000 degree
temperature
in the core we have the defunct
leftovers the helium that has been
formed
and the hydrogen is now burning in a
shell
around it and that shell continues to
burn and
powers the red giant star
but the helium core is constantly
getting
more helium dumped into it from that
shell
and gets bigger and bigger and more and
more massive
and so eventually it reaches a point
where the pressure and temperature in
the core
undergoes what's called the helium flash
where the helium itself
ignites and starts to burn and form
carbon
and so we now that causes a
huge uh flash of energy and this
star changes from a red giant it
gains in brightness and comes on gains
in temperature
rather and comes over here and becomes a
classic cepheid variable
it changes in color from red to yellow
and so it's one of these yellow giant
stars that you don't hear very much
about
and it will stay as a cepheid variable
as long as that helium core is burning
away
inside the burning hydrogen shell and
forming carbon
but of course that can't last forever
and it doesn't last very long in fact uh
it
soon ends up building an inert dead
pile of carbon as carbon ash left over
from the process
in that central core and reorganizes
itself again
crosses back this way swells up even
more
and becomes the next stage of red giant
where we have a dead core in the middle
made of carbon with a helium shell
burning outside it
and an outer hydrogen shell
and in fact if it was a heavier star it
would continue
to do this oscillating back over here
when the carbon ignited
in a carbon flash and then building an
oxygen neon
dead core which would take it back and
so
it would zigzag from the type
of red giant red giants all have an
inner
non-burning core of one element or
another
and the cepheids on the instability
strip are where
all the layers of the star are burning
and there's no
inactive core and that's why they have a
higher
temperature given their mass because
they're
using that mass more efficiently and
using all of it
to produce energy rather than having an
inner
lump of it in the center and so large
stars
zigzag backwards and forwards across
here until
they get to the top which is when
they've built an iron core and they
can't go any further and blow up as a
supernova
but for a five solar mass star it'll end
up stopping
at this stage having formed carbon it
won't have the mass to go any higher
and then it will eventually puff off its
outer layers
as a planetary nebula and
die that way
and so to illustrate that main sequence
star here is burning hydrogen in its
core
when it runs out of the ability to do to
do that
you end up with a inner helium core with
a hydrogen burning shell over it
and an outer envelope of inactive
hydrogen
making a red giant but when the helium
flash occurs
the helium ignites so it's going from
inactive to active
and the whole star is uh at a higher
temperature because of it
and you've got your yellow giant cepheid
star
where all the inner two layers are both
burning
and then that will eventually build a
carbon inactive core in the middle and
it goes back to being a less
efficient configuration where it's not
using all of the mass
to produce energy and so it reconfigures
back to
a type of red giant called an agb star
an asymptotic
giant branch star
now you also saw on that diagram at the
bottom of the instability strip
another class of star called the rr lyra
stars
these are also variables they were
recognized as being
distinct and different from the
classic cepheids or indeed from the type
two cepheids
and these have short periods they're
very faint
and they're uh again like the type two
seconds
metal poor population two stars
often found in globular clusters
and talking of globular clusters a
lovely picture of one here
with quite a few rr lyra stars in it
again we can use these up to a point to
do distance calibration it's not as
accurate as for cepheids though
but what we can see when we look at the
hertzsprung russell diagram for a
globular cluster
is that all the stars in the globular
cluster are the same age
and so what you find is very interesting
looking um
hertzberg russell diagram because all
the
giant stars that would have been on the
main sequence that would have been here
have lived their lives and died and gone
over to forming uh into the giant branch
and only the younger
the smaller stars that live longer are
still
on the main sequence and in fact there's
a very
neat turn off point here where stars
of a particular mass are turning off
and progressing towards the becoming red
giants
and from that turn-off point you can age
uh very precisely
the uh the cluster because that would
have been happening to begin with right
up here on the diagram
for the real monster stars and like a
fuse burning it's burned all the way
down to here
in a certain time so this ages the
cluster for us nicely
and we can see that all the stars that
were on here
have now gone on the most recent uh
smaller stars that have ceased to burn
hydrogen in their cores they're on their
way to being a red giant
some of them are then the older ones are
red giants
and then and more of them have gone over
here to be yellow cepheids
and then some of them are on their way
back again to become
agb stars and that's as far as it's got
in in its life and so we can age the the
clusters and see like snapshots
of the the uh evolutionary history
in different clusters by looking at the
hr diagram of the clusters
and this is how you figure out exactly
how the
whole thing fits together
now we do see one or two anomalies when
we do that
um we normally see this classic
turn off but sometimes we see some blue
stragglers over here
uh that are misbehaving and seem to be
back on the main sequence and have been
reignited
that's just a sort of confounding factor
to the picture
and it's unclear as to what the origin
of these blue stragglers is
but it may well be that they're in
binary systems
and that a star has been rejuvenated by
being fed
more pure hydrogen from the outer
envelope of its neighboring star
or something like that and has gained a
second lease of life
so that's probably what's causing that
and another complication to all of this
is that some cepheid variables for
reasons
uh that i really don't understand go
into
a harmonic mode of oscillation
most of them behave with a nice simple
one uh bass note
but some of them get into a double
oscillation or even a triple oscillation
or sometimes combinations of those
and so the periods
are shorter than they should be for the
brightness
and this can confuse the distance
estimation
so it needs to be very carefully
analyzed to make sure that the
cepheids are not in this multiple
oscillation mode
because it's uh set to confuse you it's
just like the vibrating strings on a
guitar shown in this diagram here so
it's not quite as simple as it
it's made out but nevertheless going all
the way back
just to summarize this uh i think
henrietta levitt swan did a fantastic
job
of realizing that if she studied these
uh
cepheid variables all at one standard
distance
she would be able to compare one against
the other and realize that the large
magellanic cloud
gave her that standard distance of 168
000 light years
from that she came up with the linear
relationship between brightness
and period which we can now explain
as this pressure cooker effect of the
eddington valve
of the two states of helium in these
yellow giant stars
but more than that it enables us to
bridge the gap
between the distances we can get from
parallax
to the distances we can get from
redshift and without it
without her work we really wouldn't be
able to tell how big the universe
was or solve many of their problems of
cosmology
and so it's amazing that these cepheid
variables as a sort of freak of nature
are enabling us through a very careful
observation
to put together the entire story
of the history of the universe
and i shall stop there bye